Source: C:\Users\HP\Desktop\backend\mi3ar\miyar_frontend\src\images\TR-514.pdf

--- PAGE 120 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
2.5.5 Posted Speed Limit
Posted speed limit is the legal speed limit for a road that is determined by statutes or based on an
engineering and traffic investigation. Speed limits applied to roads have an effect on vehicular
speeds and, in particular, tend to restrain the fastest drivers. These posted speeds are mandatory
and are clearly displayed to road users. Nevertheless, it is important to provide a margin of safety
for those vehicles whose drivers choose to travel faster than the speed limit. Table 2-7 indicates the
posted speed that is appropriate for a given design speed. Posted speeds are typically 20 km/h
below the design speed for high-design speeds (80 km/h or greater) and 10 km/h below the design
speed for low-design speeds (60 km/h or less). If the 85th percentile speed is greater than the posted
speed limit, this is considered an enforcement issue and is not a design issue.
Table 2-7: Posted Speeds
Design Speed Posted Speed
(km/h) (km/h)
30 – 40 30 – 40
50 40
60 50
70 60
80 80
90 90
100 100
120 120
140 140
Note: As per the Executive Council resolution 1075/ECAS dated 19-07-2017, speed margin
between the posted speed and the design is removed on the main roads where
speed cameras to be located; therefore posted speeds on the main roads where
speed cameras are installed shall be equal to the design speed.
2.5.6 Truck/Car Speed Relationship
Rural posted speed for trucks and other heavy-duty vehicles are less than the posted speed for
passenger cars and other light vehicles (typically 80 km/h or less). The Highway Capacity Manual
2010 (17) defines heavy vehicles as any vehicle with more than four wheels on the ground during
normal operations. These vehicles are generally categorised as trucks, buses, and recreation
vehicles. They typically have less acceleration and require more room for manoeuvring, lane
changing, and braking.
Trucks typically accelerate more slowly from a stop condition and experience greater difficulty in
maintaining desirable speeds on long, steep upgrades than automobiles. Truck characteristics
affecting speed on upgrades include mass, power, aerodynamic resistance, drive-train-to-gear
ratios, and tires.
The number heavy vehicles are converted to equivalent passage cars for capacity analysis
purposes. The equivalent ratio is determined based on speed, terrain, power, etc., of the heavy
vehicle. See the Highway Capacity Manual 2010 (17) for applicable equivalency ratios.
Page 108
02-GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA SECOND EDITION - NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 121 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
2.6 Design Vehicles
2.6.1 Vehicle Dimensions
The physical and operational characteristics of vehicles using the road are important controls in
roadway design. Design criteria may vary according to the type of vehicle and the volume of each
type of vehicle in the traffic stream. The design vehicle affects the radius returns, left-turn radii, lane
widths, median openings, turning roadways, and sight distances at intersections.
For urban areas, Design vehicles represent the vehicles which must be regularly accommodated at
junctions without encroachment into the opposing traffic lanes. Design vehicles applicable to the
USDM street family descriptions comprise WB-12 for Boulevards and Avenues and Single Unit
Bus/Truck (SUM) for streets and access lanes. City-Bus M is applicable for streets with designated
public bus routes and/or school bus routes at school zones. Bus routes need to be discussed and
agreed with DMT and their requirements incorporated into the design. Other design vehicles may
also need to be considered, including speed control vehicles, control vehicles and non-motorised
vehicles, depending on specific project requirements. Reference is to be made to the USDM for
further details.
Urban streets shall be designed to accommodate the occasional use of emergency vehicles (such
as a fire truck), although this is not considered the general design vehicle.
Vehicular characteristics that impact design include:
1. Size. Vehicular sizes determine lane and shoulder widths, vertical clearances and, indirectly,
roadway capacity calculations.
2. Off tracking. The design of intersection turning radii, travelled way widening for horizontal
curves, and pavement widths for interchange ramps are usually controlled by the largest
design vehicle likely to use the facility with some frequency.
3. Storage Requirements. Turn-bay storage lengths, bus turnouts, and parking lot layouts are
determined by the number and types of vehicles to be accommodated.
4. Sight Distance. Eye height and braking distances vary for passenger cars and trucks, which
can impact sight distance considerations.
5. Acceleration and Deceleration. Acceleration and deceleration rates often govern the
dimensioning of such design features as speed-change lanes at intersections or interchange
ramps, climbing lanes, or passing lanes.
6. Vehicular Stability. Certain vehicles with high centres of gravity may be prone to skidding or
overturning, affecting design speed selection, and superelevation design elements.
Table 2-8 and Table 2-9 present design vehicular dimensions and minimum turning radii for design
vehicles used in Abu Dhabi. These tables can be used to input vehicle dimensions into turning
template software (e.g. AutoTurn). Figure 2-2 and Figure 2-3 illustrate the application of the basic
dimensions for combination trucks.
Page 109
02-GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA SECOND EDITION - NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 122 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
2.6.2 Turning Templates
The design vehicle affects the radius returns, left-turn radii, lane widths, median openings, turning
roadways, and sight distances at an intersection. Figure 2-4 provides turning characteristics of
typical design vehicle. The designer should use the appropriate turning software programs to check
their designs. Include a copy of swept path design when submitting plans to the DMT for review. The
basic design vehicles used by Abu Dhabi for design include:
• Passenger Car (P)
• Single Unit Truck (SU-9 and SU-12)
• City Transit Bus (CITY-BUS)
• Semitrailer Intermediate (WB-12 and WB-15)
• Interstate Semitrailer (WB-20)
• Double Semitrailer/Trailer (WB-33D)
Table 2-8: Minimum Turning Radii of Design Vehicles
Minimum Design Centreline(1)
Minimum Inside
Design Vehicle Type Symbol Turning Radius Turning Radius
Radius (m)
(m) (CTR) (m)
Passenger Car P 7.26 6.40 4.39
Single Unit Truck SU-9 12.73 11.58 8.64
Single Unit Truck SU-12 15.60 14.46 11.09
City Transit Bus CITY-BUS 12.50(2) 11.52 5.30**
Intermediate
WB-12 12.16 10.97 5.88
Semitrailer
Intermediate
WB-15 13.66 12.50 5.20
Semitrailer(3)
Interstate
WB-20 13.66 12.50 0.59
Semitrailer(3)
Double Trailer
WB-33D 18.25 17.04 4.19
Combination(3)
Source: (1) Revised
(1) The turning radius assumed by a designer when investigating possible turning paths and is set at the
centreline of the front axle of a vehicle. If the minimum turning path is assumed, the CTR approximately
equals the minimum design turning radius minus one-half the front width of the vehicle.
(2) Based on dimensions provided by the DMT Public Transport Division.
(3) Only use this design vehicle in rural areas.
For other design vehicles, see the AASHTO A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets (1). Note
that the other design vehicles generally have better performance (e.g. off tracking) than the design vehicles
listed above.
Page 110
02-GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA SECOND EDITION - NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 123 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
Table 2-9: Design Vehicle Dimensions
Dimens Typical kingpin to
ions center of rear axle
— — — 7.77 11.40 13.87 12.34
(m)
WB — — — — — 12.19
3
T — — — — — 3.05(4)
Wheelba S — — — — — 1.37(4)
ses
WB — — — 8.38 10.80 13.84 12.19
2
WB 3.10 6.10 7.62 7.00(5) 3.81 4.50 6.58 3.72
1
Rear 1.10 1.83 3.20 2.44 0.76(2) 0.60(2) 1.44(3) 1.37(3)
Overhan
g
Front 0.80 1.22 1.22 2.87(5) 0.91 0.91 1.22 0.71
Lengt
5.00(1) 9.14 12.04 13.70(5) 13.87 16.80 22.40 34.75
h
Overall Width 2.13 2.44 2.44 2.50(5) 2.44 2.59 2.59 2.59
3.35- 3.35-
Height 1.30 3.20 4.11 4.11 4.11 4.11
4.11 4.11
CITY
Symbol P SU-9 SU-12 WB-12 WB-15 WB-20(2) WB-33D(2)
BUS
Pa Sin Sin
City Interme Interme
sse gle- gle- Combi Interstate Double-
Bus Tran diate diate
Design Vehicle Type ng unit unit nation semitrailer/t semitrailer/t
es: sit semitrai semitrai
er truc truc trucks: railer(6) railer(6)
Bus ler ler(6)
car k k
Source: (1) Revised
Notes:
WB1, WB2 and WB3 are the effective vehicle wheelbases or distances between axle groups, starting
at the front and working towards the back of each unit.
S is the distance from the rear effective axle to the hitch point or point of articulation.
T is the distance from the hitch point or articulation measured back to the center of the next axle or
center of tandem axle assembly.
(1) Passenger cars may range from 5.0 m (Austroads Design Vehicles and Turning Path Templates)
to 5.79 m (AASHTO).
(2) Design vehicle with 16.15-m trailer.
(3) Combined dimension is typically 3.81 m. This is overhang from the back axle of the tandem axle
assembly.
(4) Combined dimension is typically 3.81 m.
(5) Public Transport Division bus dimensions.
(6) Only use this design vehicle in rural areas.
Page 111
02-GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA SECOND EDITION - NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 124 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
Figure 2-2: Basic Dimension of Tractor–Semitrailer Vehicle
Page 112
02-GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA SECOND EDITION - NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 125 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
Figure 2-3: Basic Dimension of Tractor–Semitrailer Vehicle/
Trailer Vehicle (Double Trailer)
.y .y
lb lb
m m
e e
s s
s
a
s
a
e e
lx lx
a a
m m
e e
d
n
d
n
a a
t
fo
t
fo
e e
r r
tn tn
e e
c c
r r
o o
e e
lx lx
a a
tx tx
e e
n n
n
o
e
h
t
fo
n
o
e
h
t
fo
ita
e
ita
e
lu
c
r
tn
lu
c
r
tn
itr e
c
itr e
c
a
fo
e
h
a
fo
e
h
tn
t
o tn
t
o
io t
k
io t
k
p c p c
r a r a
o b o b
tn
io
d
e r
tn
io
d
e r
p u p u
h
s
a h
s
a
c e c e
tih m tih m
e n e n
h o h o
t
o
ita t
o
ita
t
e
lu
c
t
e
lu
c
lx
a
itr
a
lx
a
itr
a
e r e r
v o v o
itc tn itc tn
e
ffe
r a
e
r
io
p
h c
tih
e
ffe
r a
e
r
io
p
h c
tih
e e e e
h h h h
t
m
t
m
t
m
t
m
o o o o
r f
e
r f
e
r f
e
r f
e
c c c c
n n n n
a
ts
a
ts
a
ts
a
ts
iD iD iD iD
= = = =
S T S T
Page 113
02-GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA SECOND EDITION - NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 126 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
Figure 2-4: Turning Characteristics of a Typical Semitrailer Design Vehicle
Definitions:
1. Turning Radius. The circular arc formed by the turning path radius of the front outside tire of a vehicle. This
radius is also described by vehicular manufacturers as the “turning curb radius.”
2. CTR. The turning radius assumed by a designer when investigating possible turning paths. It is set at the
centre of the front axle of a vehicle.
3. Off tracking. The difference in the paths of the front and rear wheels of a vehicle as it negotiates a turn.
The path of each rearward tire of a turning vehicle does not coincide with that of the corresponding forward
tire. This phenomenon is shown in the drawing above.
4. Swept Path Width. The amount of roadway width that a vehicle covers in negotiating a turn equal to the
amount of off tracking, plus the width of the vehicle. The most significant dimension affecting the swept
path width of a tractor/semitrailer is the distance from the kingpin to the rear trailer axle or axles. The
greater this distance, the greater the swept path width.
5. Steering Angle. The maximum angle of turn built into the steering mechanism of the front wheels of a
vehicle. This maximum angle controls the minimum turning radius of the vehicle.
6. Tractor/Trailer Angle. The angle between adjoining units of a tractor/semitrailer when the combination unit
is placed into a turn. This angle is measured between the longitudinal axes of the tractor and trailer as the
vehicle turns. The maximum tractor/trailer angle occurs when a vehicle makes a 180° turn at the minimum
turning radius and is reached slightly beyond the point where a maximum swept path width is achieved.
Source: (1)
Page 114
02-GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA SECOND EDITION - NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 127 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
2.6.3 Acceleration and Deceleration Rates
Acceleration and deceleration rates of trucks are often critical parameters in determining the road
design. These rates often govern the dimensions of such design features as intersections, freeway
ramps, climbing or passing lanes, and turnout bays for buses. Trucks typically accelerate more
slowly from a stop condition and experience greater difficulty in maintaining desirable speeds on
long, steep upgrades than passenger cars. Based on their acceleration performance, the passenger
cars seldom control design.
Trucks generally require longer deceleration distances than passenger cars. On vertical curves, the
higher eye height for trucks often compensates for this longer distance. However, at locations with
lateral sight distance restrictions (inside of horizontal curves), the benefits of the higher eye level
may be lost. Therefore, truck deceleration considerations or other remedial measures (e.g. signing
and higher friction surfaces) may be required.
The AASHTO A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets (1) provides passenger car
deceleration and acceleration rates. Chapter 6 “Vertical Alignment” provides data on truck
acceleration and deceleration rates.
2.7 Transportation Demand
To properly design the roadway facility, the road designer must determine the appropriate
transportation/traffic related parameters to use for the design of the facility. Selection of the
appropriate parameter is dependent upon several factors. The designer must ensure the parameter
value is appropriate for their design. For additional guidance on selection of the applicable
parameters, see the Highway Capacity Manual 2010 (HCM) (17).
2.7.1 Traffic Volume Demand Parameters
Traffic volume demand parameters are necessary to produce traffic demand estimates for use in
planning, project alternative evaluation, and selection, environmental studies, designs that lead to
construction, transportation network improvement, and pavement design. In order to determine
traffic volume demand parameters, it is important to identify the different road network facility types
(i.e. definitions and attributes) that currently exist. The different types of road network facilities in Abu
Dhabi are classified in Section 2.4. The designer also needs to consider all user types (e.g.,
pedestrians, transit users, cyclists, motor vehicles) in determining the demand.
2.7.2 Design Year Selection
The geometric design of a road should be designed to accommodate the expected user volumes
predicted to occur during the life of the facility, assuming reasonable maintenance. This involves
projecting the volumes to a selected future year. The forecasts for the farthest horizon year available
in the STEAM model of DMT is to be utilized. In case it is not available for a particular area, the
design year is 20 years from the expected construction completion date for new construction and
reconstruction projects.
2.7.3 User Characteristics
Forecasting future demand volumes requires understanding of future land use, demographics, and
changes in the transportation system. It is usually completed by using STEAM as described in the
Page 115
02-GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA SECOND EDITION - NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 128 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
previous section. Current user data is used to predict the future ADT, peak hour(s), directional
distribution, and traffic composition. These characteristics are discussed in the following sections.
Forecasts of future activity levels should include estimates of pedestrian and cyclist activity.
Particular care must be used when forecasting pedestrian and cyclist volumes. Many times there is
latent demand above observed pedestrian and cyclist volumes because pedestrian and cyclist
facilities do not yet exist in the project area, are substandard, or do not provide complete connectivity
to attractions. It is important to evaluate future land development, including any potential attractors
(e.g. transit stops, schools, parks, retail uses) that may be located near moderate and high-density
residential development.
2.7.3.1 Average Daily Traffic
The design of a road and its features should be based upon the traffic volumes and characteristics
to be served. Information on traffic volume serves to establish the loads for the geometric road
design. The data collected by agencies include traffic volumes for days of the year and time of day,
as well as the distribution of vehicles by type and weight. This data also includes information on
trends from which the designer may estimate the traffic to be expected in the future.
The basic measure of the traffic demand for a road is the average daily traffic (ADT) volume. The
ADT is defined as the total volume during a given time period (in whole days), greater than one day
and less than one year, divided by the number of days in that time period. The current ADT volume
for a road can be readily determined when continuous traffic counts are available. When only periodic
counts are taken, the ADT volume can be estimated by adjusting the periodic counts according to
the season, month, or day of week.
2.7.3.2 Peak Hour Traffic
Capacity and other traffic analysis typically focus on the peak-hour volume as it represents the most
critical period of operations and has the highest capacity requirements. The travel pattern on any
road varies during hours of the day, day of the week, or time of year. Rural and recreational routes
often show a wide variation in peak hour volumes. Urban streets, on the other hand, show less
variation in peak-hour traffic.
A key design decision involves determining which hourly volume should be used for design. The
selected design hourly volume (DHV) should not be so low that it is often exceeded, or so high that
users would rarely be sufficient to make full use of the resulting facility. The selection of an
appropriate hour for planning, design, and operational purposes is a compromise between providing
an adequate level of service for all users for nearly every hour of the year and providing economic
efficiency. For rural and recreational routes, the 30th highest hour is typically used for the DHV. For
urban areas, the 100th hour is often used as the DHV. The designer should review the resulting
conditions from the selected design hour to ensure the acceptability of the design (i.e. meets the
needs of drivers, pedestrians, cyclists, and transit.).
2.7.3.3 Peak Hour Factor
Peak hour traffic volumes are critical in evaluating capacity and other parameters because they
represent the most critical time period. It is the period during which demand is at its highest. The
analysis of level of service is based on peak rates of flow occurring within the peak hour because
substantial short-term fluctuations typically occur during an hour. Common practice is to use a peak
Page 116
02-GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA SECOND EDITION - NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 129 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
15-minute rate of flow. Flow rates are usually expressed in vehicles per hour, not vehicles per 15
minutes. The relationship between the peak 15-minute flow rate and the full hourly volume is given
by the peak-hour factor (PHF) as shown in Equation 2.1:
PHF = Hourly Volume/Peak Rate of Flow (within the hour)
Equation 2.1: Peak Hour Factor
If 15-minute periods are used, the PHF is computed as:
PHF = V/(4 x V )
15
Equation 2.2: Peak Hour Factor (based on 15-minute period)
where: PHF = Peak Hour Factor
V = Peak Hour Volume (vph)
V = Volume during the peak 15 minutes of flow (veh/15 minutes)
15
The following example illustrates the application of the PHF:
Example 2.7–1
Given: One hour traffic count (7:00 – 8:00) along a rural freeway:
7:00 - 7:15: 170
7:15 - 7:30: 200
7:30 - 7:45: 220
7:45 - 8:00: 180
Problem: Compute the peak hour factor (PHF).
Solution: Determine the peak hour factor:
PHF = 770/(4  220) = 770/880 = 0.875
Typical peak-hour factors for freeways range between 0.80 and 0.95. Lower factors are more typical
for rural freeways or off-peak conditions. Higher factors are typical of urban peak-hour conditions.
2.7.3.4 Directional Distribution
For two-lane rural roads, the DHV is the total traffic in both directions of travel. In the design of roads
with more than two lanes, on two-lane roads where important intersections are encountered, or
where additional lanes are to be provided later, knowledge of the hourly traffic volume for each
direction of travel is important.
A dual carriageway with a high percentage of traffic in one direction during the peak hours may need
more lanes than a road having the same ADT, but an equal percentage of directional traffic. During
peak hours on most rural roads, 55% to 70% of the traffic is travelling in the peak direction, with up
to as much as 80% occasionally. Directional distributions of traffic vary enough between sites that
two dual carriageways carrying equal traffic may have significantly different peak direction volumes.
Page 117
02-GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA SECOND EDITION - NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 130 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
Some studies have shown that urban radial routes may have up to 66% of the traffic travelling in the
same direction during the peak hour. Unfortunately, this peak occurs in one direction in the morning
and the opposite direction in the evening. Consequently, both directions of the facility must have
capacity for the peak directional flow. Urban circumferential routes often have a 50/50 split during
the peak hours for a more balanced flow.
The directional distribution of traffic during the DHV should be determined by making field
measurements on the facility under consideration or on parallel and similar facilities.
In designing intersections and interchanges, the volumes of all movements occurring during the
design hour is required. This information is necessary for both the morning and evening peak periods
because the traffic pattern may change significantly from one peak hour to the other.
2.7.3.5 Traffic Composition
Vehicles of different sizes and weights have different operating characteristics and should be
considered in road design. Trucks are generally slower, occupy more roadway space, and have a
greater individual effect on traffic operations than do passenger vehicles. The effect on traffic
operation of one truck is often equivalent to several passenger cars. The number of equivalent
passenger cars equalling the effect of one truck is dependent on the roadway gradient and, for two-
lane roads, on the available passing sight distance. Therefore, the larger the proportion of trucks in
a traffic stream, the greater the equivalent traffic demand and the greater the road capacity needed.
For geometric design, it is essential to have traffic data on the types of vehicles expected for the
roadway facility. These data generally indicate the major types of trucks and buses as percentages
of all traffic expected to use the road. At intersections, the percentage of trucks during the morning
and evening peak hours should be determined separately. Variations in truck traffic between the
various traffic movements at intersections may be substantial and may influence the appropriate
geometric layout.
2.7.3.6 Traffic Growth Rate
In studies that do not require running the regional travel demand forecasting model to estimate future
traffic demands, the growth factor method can be used to estimate these demands. To establish
future year forecasts, the growth factor method relies on the use of projected growth factors to
existing year traffic data. The method assumes that the recent percentage of growth in traffic will
continue in the future. These trend-line forecasts are most reliable for relatively short periods of time
(5 years or less). Ideally, the growth factors are obtained based on traffic counts taken in the past
few years. To estimate the growth factors, Equation 2.3 should be used.
EFD = BD*(1+i)n
Equation 2.3: Future Demand
where: FD = Future demand
BD = Base year demand
I = growth rate
n = number of years between base year and future year
Page 118
02-GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA SECOND EDITION - NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 131 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
2.7.4 Capacity and Operational Analyses
2.7.4.1 Highway Capacity Manual
Capacity is the maximum sustainable hourly flow rate at which persons or vehicles reasonably can
be expected to transverse a point, or a uniform section of roadway during a given time period under
prevailing road, environmental, traffic, and control conditions. The goal of the designer is to ensure
the expected capacity of road reasonably meets the demand for all users of the facility (pedestrian,
transit users, cyclists, motor vehicular users, trucks). There are several documents available to assist
the designer in determining the capacity of a facility (e.g. United Kingdom’s Design Manual for Roads
and Bridges). In Abu Dhabi, the designer should follow the guidance provided in the Highway
Capacity Manual 2010 (HCM) (17).
The HCM was developed considering the following analysis areas:
• levels of analysis (operations, design, preliminary engineering, and planning);
• travel modes (automobile and other motorised vehicles, pedestrians, cyclists, and transit
where it is part of a multimodal urban street facility);
• spatial coverage (points, segments, and facilities); and
• temporal coverage (undersaturated and oversaturated conditions).
The HCM provides tools to assist in estimating performance measures for individual elements of a
multimodal transportation system, as well as guidance on combining those elements to evaluate
larger portions of the system. Table 2-10 provides the system elements and the service
measurements used in the HCM.
To more accurately determine roadway capacities, capacity methodologies have grown in
complexity and cannot be reasonably documented (e.g. some methodologies require several
iterations to reach a solution). Consequently, commercial software (e.g. Synchro, PASSER II,
PASSER IV, CORSIM) is available to assist the road designer in running the complex methodologies
presented in the HCM.
The HCM was developed for the conditions in North America and, in particular, the United States.
Consequently, the designer should carefully evaluate the default values provided in the HCM to
ensure they are accurate for the conditions in Abu Dhabi. The Abu Dhabi Transportation Impact
Study Guidelines (18) provides the performance measures and criteria to be used in Abu Dhabi. The
applicable performance measures are also provided in Chapter 7 “Rural and Urban Freeways,”
Chapter 8 “Rural Roads,” Chapter 9 “Urban Streets,” and Chapter 10 “Intersections.”
Page 119
02-GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA SECOND EDITION - NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 132 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
Table 2-10: HCM Service Measures
Systems
HCM Service Measure(s)
System Element Analysis
Chapter
Automobile Pedestrian Bicycle Transit Measure
Freeway Facility 10 Density — — — Speed
Basic freeway
11 Density — — — Speed
segment
Freeway weaving
12 Density — — — Speed
segment
Freeway Merge and
13 Density — — — Speed
Diverge Segments
Multilane Road 14 Density — LOS Score — Speed
Percent
time spent
Two-Lane Road 15 — LOS Score — Speed
following,
speed
Urban Street Facility 16 Speed LOS Score LOS Score LOS Score Speed
Urban Street
17 Speed LOS Score LOS Score LOS Score Speed
Segment
Signalised
18 Delay LOS Score LOS Score — Delay
Intersection
Two-Way Stop 19 Delay Delay — — Delay
All-Way Stop 20 Delay — — — Delay
Roundabout 21 Delay — — — Delay
Interchange Ramp
22 Delay — — — Delay
Terminal
Off-Street Pedestrian-
23 — Space events LOS Score — Speed
Bicycle Facility
Source: (17)
2.7.4.2 Performance Measures
The performance measures and standards intended to be used for the purpose of evaluating and
assessing the perception of roadway users’ quality/level of service and capacity at planning,
preliminary/detailed engineering design, and operation levels. They also provide an integrated
multimodal approach to the analysis and evaluation of roadway transportation facilities from the
points of view of automobile drivers, transit passengers, bicyclists, and pedestrians. Further, they
provide thresholds for estimating and predicting acceptable performance levels in Abu Dhabi.
1. Quality of Service. Quality of service is a user based perception of how well a transportation
service or facility operates. In other words, how the existing and potential users perceive the
overall quality of service provided to them. It is a qualitative measure describing operational
conditions within a traffic stream, based on service measures (e.g. speed and travel time,
freedom to manoeuvre, traffic interruptions, comfort, safety, and convenience).
2. Level of Service. Level of service (LOS) is a quantitative stratification of quality of service.
LOS reflects the quality of service as measured by a scale of user satisfaction and is
applicable to each of the following modes that use roadways: automobiles and trucks,
cyclists, pedestrians, and buses. LOS is given a letter of designation from A to F, with LOS
A, representing the best operating condition while LOS F, represents an over-saturated and
Page 120
02-GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA SECOND EDITION - NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 133 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
heavily congested condition. Table 2-11 shows the typical operating conditions represented
by these LOS. Each facility type generally has its own specific definitions for LOS.
Procedures for computing operational and roadway factors to define for conditions that are
other than ideal are applied through the level of service (LOS) concept.
In general, the designer should strive to provide the highest LOS practical. However, in urban
environments, the designer needs to consider other factors (e.g. pedestrians, cyclists, transit
users, level of development). In these cases, it may be more desirable to accept a lower LOS
than otherwise may have been provided.
Table 2-11: General LOS Definitions of Automobiles
Level of Service General Operating Conditions
A Free flow
B Reasonably free flow
C Stable flow
D Approaching unstable flow
E Unstable flow
F Breakdown flow
Note: Specific definitions of LOS A – F vary by facility type and are presented in the HCM.
Source: (17)
2.7.4.3 Principles and Categories of Planning and Operational
Measures of Performance
• The performance measures should be measurable and expressed quantitatively over time to
determine if the performance toward a goal is getting better or worse.
• The target for each performance indicator should be attainable and the desired result must
be acceptable.
• The performance measures should be relevant and specific to each transportation facility.
The following categories of performance measures are considered inclusive and appropriate for Abu
Dhabi transportation facilities. The proposed LOS criteria and thresholds for each roadway facility
correspond to the relevant performance categories.
• volume-based measures
• delay-based measures
• density-based measures
• index-based measures
• speed and frequency-based measures
2.7.4.4 Principles for Acceptable Level of Performance
While determining the acceptable LOS threshold for Abu Dhabi, special and distinguished focus
should be paid to how LOS thresholds relate to the following:
Page 121
02-GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA SECOND EDITION - NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 134 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
• greenhouse gas emissions and air quality
• energy consumption and vehicle operating costs
• network performance variations
• safety
• quality of life
• traffic congestion
• travel time reliability and costs
• vehicle operating costs
On the basis of the findings of the above relationships, the performance measures and LOS criteria
for various transportation facilities are provided elsewhere in the applicable chapters of this Manual.
However, it should be noted that the methodologies and procedures employed in determining the
LOS standards for different transportation facilities are specified and described within the HCM.
2.7.4.5 Posted Speed
One of the important parameters used in capacity analysis is speed. Posted speeds are to be used
in traffic capacity analysis (modelling).
2.7.4.6 Uninterrupted Roadway Capacity
Vehicle capacity of uninterrupted roadway facility is the maximum number of vehicles that can pass
a given point during a specified period under prevailing roadway and traffic conditions. It is normally
expressed in passenger cars/hour/lane. In the capacity and level of service analysis, heavy vehicles
have to be converted to their passenger car equivalents. In general, the capacity analysis procedures
that are used identify capacity values for a set of standard ideal or base conditions. A link capacity
analysis is required for all links within the study area. Lane capacities for each link type in Abu Dhabi
are provided in Table 2-12.
Table 2-12: Typical Lane Capacities in Abu Dhabi
Link Type Lane Capacity (pc/hr/ln)
Freeway 2200
Expressway 2000
Arterial/Boulevard/Avenue (signalised, non-CBD) 1000
Arterial/Boulevard (signalised, CBD) 700
Collector/Avenue/Street 700
Ramp 1500
Rural Single Carriageway (1+1) 1100
Local Road/Street 600
Source: (18)
The results of the capacity analysis for links on arterial or collector roads with signal, stop, give-way,
or roundabout control need to be discussed comparing to the relevant intersection analysis results.
Free-flow links (e.g. freeways) may also be affected by weaving and merging. Critical results
therefore need to be discussed and agreed upon with the Client.
For local (or residential) roads, a maximum traffic flow of 600 vehicles per direction per lane per peak
hour applies. Traffic flows exceeding this value suggest other through-traffic using this road. A
Page 122
02-GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA SECOND EDITION - NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 135 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
different function, for example as collector road demanding different designs and dimensions may
be more appropriate. For a local road, other criteria (e.g. safety improvements, reduction of noise
and pollution) are of higher importance and should guide design and dimensioning of the road, rather
than capacity.
2.7.4.7 Saturation Flow Rate at Signalised Intersections
For signalised intersections, capacity is calculated as the product of saturation flow rate and effective
green divided by the cycle length. Saturation flow rate is the maximum flow rate of vehicles that can
be sustained across a signal stop line, assuming 100% green time and is expressed in passenger
cars per hour green per lane. The value of saturation flow rate is required to estimate signalised
intersection capacities and other associated performance measures using analytical procedures and
microscopic simulation models.
To determine the lost-time at signalised intersections, the capacity of a signalised intersection
movement is calculated as the product of saturation flow rate and the effective green divided by
cycle length. The effective green for a given movement is calculated as the sum of the green and
yellow times for the movement minus the total lost time. The lost time consists of two components:
• start-up lost time due to drivers’ perception-reaction time at the beginning of green and,
• clearance (yellow) interval lost time at the end of yellow.
The default value for the start-up lost time is 2.0 seconds. The default value of the number of seconds
used by vehicles during the yellow (sec.) is 3.0 seconds in the Emirate, even at intersections that
have flashing green. The applicable All Red time is 2 seconds.
2.7.4.8 Pedestrian and Cyclist Speeds
Pedestrian and Cyclist’s speeds are the most important capacity characteristics that need to be
considered when designing pedestrian and cycle facilities. Walking speed is influenced by
pedestrian density, gender, size of platoon, percentage of elderly population, disabled pedestrian
population, and child pedestrian population. A walking speed of 1.2 m/s can be used as the design
speed. However, use 0.9 m/s to 1.05 m/s at locations with high proportions of elderly and slower
pedestrians.
The typical speed of cyclists is about 24 km/h for segregated cycle tracks and 16 km/h for shared
facilities. Among the factors that affect cycle speed are the type of cycle, the cycle track, pavement
surface type, weather conditions, the grade of the track, and the mix of other non-motorized users
on the cycle track.
2.8 Environmental Considerations
Roads have wide-ranging effects in addition to providing traffic service to users. It is important that
roads be considered as an element of the total environment. The term “environment” as used here,
refers to the totality of humankind’s surroundings (social, physical, natural, and synthetic). It includes
the human, animal, and plant communities, and the forces that act on all three. The road can and
should be located and designed to complement its environment and serve as a catalyst to
environmental improvement.
Page 123
02-GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA SECOND EDITION - NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 136 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
The area surrounding a proposed road is an interrelated system of natural (e.g. wind, sand),
synthetic, and sociologic variables. Changes in one variable within this system cannot be made
without some effect on other variables. The consequences of some of these effects may be
negligible, but others may have a strong and lasting impact on the environment, including the
sustenance and quality of human life. Because road location and design decisions have an effect on
the development of adjacent areas, it is important that environmental variables be given full
consideration, as listed below:
• To present managers and decision makers with a clear assessment of potential impacts that
a project may have on the overall environment;
• To apply to a project a methodology that assesses and predicts impacts and provides the (a)
means for impact prevention and mitigation, (b) enhancement of project benefits, and (c)
minimization of long-term impacts; and
• To provide a specific forum in which consultation is systematically undertaken in a manner
that allows stakeholders to have a direct input to the environmental management process.
Also, exercise care to ensure that all applicable environmental requirements are met. For example,
see Chapter 3 “Cross Section Elements” for guidance on blowing sand.
For additional guidance on environmental considerations, review the Abu Dhabi Planning Council
ESTIDAMA website (12), Abu Dhabi Environmental, Health, and Safety Manual for Main Roads (19),
and Abu Dhabi Environmental Assessment for Road Projects Manual (20).
2.9 Right-of-Way Considerations
The provision of right-of-way widths that accommodate construction, adequate drainage, and proper
maintenance of a road is an important part of the overall design. Wide rights-of-way permit the
construction of gentle slopes, resulting in greater safety for the motorist and providing for easier and
more economical maintenance. The procurement of sufficient right-of-way at the time of the initial
improvement permits the widening of the roadway and the widening and strengthening of the
pavement at a reasonable cost as traffic volumes increase.
The minimum right-of-way width for all functional classifications will be the sum of the travel lanes,
outside shoulders, and median width, if applicable, plus the necessary width for fill and cut slopes,
or for roadside clear zones, whichever is greater. Desirably, the right-of-way width will accommodate
the anticipated ultimate development of the roadway and utility services corridors. The geometric
design tables in Chapter 7 “Rural and Urban Freeways,” Chapter 8 “Rural Roads,” and Chapter 9
“Urban Streets” provide the minimum right-of-way widths for roadways in Abu Dhabi. Determination
of the final right-of-way width must be coordinated with the Client.
The right-of-way width should be uniform, where practical. In urban areas, variable widths may be
necessary due to existing development; varying side slopes and embankment heights may make it
desirable to vary the right-of-way width; and right-of-way limits will likely have to be adjusted at
intersections and freeway interchanges.
In developed areas, it may be desirable to limit the right-of-way widths. However, the right-of-way
width should not be less than that required for all the elements of the design cross sections, utility
accommodation, and appropriate border areas. The client will review all official written requests, with
Page 124
02-GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA SECOND EDITION - NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 137 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
justification, for departures from the minimum right-of-way requirements. For additional guidance on
determining right-of-way widths in urban environments, see the Abu Dhabi Urban Street Design
Manual (4).
Generally, embankment height between 1.5m-2.0m is used and can be more than 3.0m at drainage
facilities and utility locations or Sabkha areas. Embankment heights shall be studied and minimized
as much as possible unless any special cases such as Sabkha areas. Utility providers’ requirements
for existing/proposed networks shall be optimized. Drainage facilities shall be provided in natural
stream/depressed areas in order to minimize their negative impacts on the road elevation, where
applicable.”
2.10 Access Control and Access Management
Access management is the careful consideration of the location, type, and design of vehicular access
points to serve land development in a manner that helps minimise negative impacts while still
providing sufficient accessibility to the land. It is a systematic and strategic response to the
recognition that vehicular manoeuvres and volumes at each access point will have specific and
accumulative consequences to the flow and safety of the road for all user types. It also involves
roadway design applications (e.g. median treatments, auxiliary lanes), the design of intersections,
and the appropriate spacing of traffic signals.
In its simplest form, access management is conflict management. In the flow of traffic from origin to
destination, the fewer conflicts that occur during the driving experience, the less the delay and the
lower the probability of a crash. When the speed of the vehicle or the frequency of access conflicts
increases, the rate of conflict and the average frequency of crashes increase. Access management
techniques work to reduce both the frequency and severity of traffic conflicts.
Access management is applied in a hierarchical manner. Freeways have the highest level of control
where access is only allowed using well-spaced, well-designed directional ramps. The entire freeway
has a non-traversable median to prohibit cross movements. As the functional hierarchy steps down,
to expressway then arterial, more access is allowed, but must be well spaced and include design
elements (e.g. turn lanes) and well-designed transitions. See Figure 2-1.
Access management in Abu Dhabi is a governmental program that sets standards for the location,
type, and design of all access points to any public road in the entire Emirate. The program has been
created and is implemented to help preserve the functional integrity of public roads to ensure that
the mobility, efficiency, and safety of public roads are maintained for today and future generations.
The Abu Dhabi Access Management Policy and Procedures Manual (21) defines 13 access
categories based on the facility’s functional classification and whether the facility is in an urban or
rural environment. See the Abu Dhabi Access Management Policy and Procedures Manual for
definitions and design requirements for each access category.
2.11 Non-Road Design Controls
The characteristics of drivers and vehicles significantly influence the selected design criteria. Where
the driver and vehicle are properly accommodated, the safety and serviceability of the road system
are enhanced. When they are not accommodated, inefficient operation may result.
Page 125
02-GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA SECOND EDITION - NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 138 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
2.11.1 Drivers
There are two types of drivers — typical and elderly drivers. The following provides guidance on
these drivers:
1. Typical Driver. The appropriate considerations for drivers are already built into the applicable
geometric design values (e.g. stopping sight distance, horizontal curvature, superelevation,
roadway widths). Typical drivers vary widely in their operating skills, experience, intelligence,
and physical condition. The road should be as forgiving as practical to minimise the adverse
effects of driver errors. The following discusses certain principles and driver traits that should
be incorporated into the roadway design:
a. Information Processing. Drivers are limited in how quickly they can gather
information, make a decision, and take action. They must process information related
to lane placement, speed, traffic control devices, road alignment, roadside conflicts,
and weather. If the amount, complexity, or clarity of the information is inappropriate
or excessive, this may lead to driver error.
b. Primacy. Certain driving functions are more important than others. In order of
importance they are:
i. Control. Activities related to the physical control of the vehicle via the steering
wheel, brake, or accelerator.
ii. Guidance. Activities related to selecting a safe speed and vehicular path on
the road.
iii. Navigation. Activities related to planning and executing a trip from point of
origin to destination.
The designer must be aware of the relative importance of these activities and ensure
that the more important road information is properly conveyed to the driver. This could
result in the decision to remove or relocate lower priority information, if it is likely to
interfere with the higher priority information.
c. Expectancy. Drivers are conditioned through experience and training to expect and
anticipate what lies ahead on the road. If this driver expectancy is violated, it will
increase the time needed by the driver to assess the situation and make the correct
decision. These violations should be avoided. Where they are unavoidable, the
designer should allow for increased warning time.
d. Speed. Speed must be considered when accommodating the driver. Higher speeds
reduce the visual field and restrict peripheral vision.
2. Elderly Driver. In general, the median age of drivers is increasing. This reality greatly
emphasises the criticality of the relationship between the driver and the roadway
environment. Although the opinions are not unanimous, there is general agreement that
advancing age has an effect on an individual’s perceptual, mental, and motor skills. It is
important for the designer to be aware of the needs of the elderly driver and, where desirable,
factor these needs into the roadway design.
Page 126
02-GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA SECOND EDITION - NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 139 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
2.11.2 Pedestrians and Cyclists
Roads throughout the Emirate are to be designed to emphasise family, hospitality, inclusiveness,
and pedestrian access to neighbourhood facilities, including mosques and schools. All streets should
be designed to accommodate pedestrians, transit users, cyclists, and motorists so that all modes
offer an attractive choice.
Do not include provisions for pedestrians and cyclists along freeways. However, consider providing
provisions for pedestrians and cyclists to safely cross the freeway at appropriate locations (e.g.
pedestrian bridges).
Abu Dhabi Walking and Cycling Master Plan, Chapter 13 “Pedestrian and Cyclist Facilities”, and the
Abu Dhabi Urban Street Design Manual (4) provide guidance on the design criteria for pedestrians
and cyclists accommodations.
2.12 Road Safety
Highways should be designed to minimize driver decisions and to reduce unexpected situations. The
number of crashes increases with an increase in the number of decisions required of the driver.
Uniformity in highway design features and traffic control devices plays an important role in reducing
the number of required decisions, and by this means, the driver becomes aware of what to expect
on a certain type of highway.
The most significant design factor contributing to safety is the provision of full access control. Full
access control reduces the number, frequency, and variety of events to which drivers must respond.
The beneficial effect of this element has been documented in several reports. One of the principal
findings of these studies is that highways without access control invariably had higher crash rates
than those with access control.
The principle of full access control is invaluable as a means for preserving the capacity of arterial
highways and of minimizing crash potential; however, this principle does not have universal
application. Highways without control of access are essential as land service facilities, and the
design features and operating characteristics of these highways need to be carefully planned so that
they will reduce conflicts and minimize the interference between vehicles and still meet the needs of
highway users.
Speed is often a contributing factor in crashes, but its role must be related to actual conditions at a
crash site to be understood. It is improper to conclude that any given speed is safer than another for
all combinations of the many kinds of drivers, vehicles, highways, and local conditions. For a highway
with particularly adverse roadway conditions, a relatively low speed may result in fewer crashes than
a high speed, but this does not necessarily mean that all potential crashes can be eliminated by low
speeds. Likewise, vehicles traveling on good roads at relatively high speed may have lower crash
involvement rates than vehicles traveling at lower speeds, but it does not necessarily follow that yet
a higher speed would be even safer
When designing a highway, consideration should be given to the type and characteristics of the
drivers expected to use the highway. Trip purposes (such as recreation, commuting to work, and
through travel) are factors affecting the design to some extent. Trip purposes are related to the mix
of vehicle types likely to use the highway, ranging from all passenger vehicles to a high percentage
of heavy commercial vehicles. Where trips of one type predominate, the facility should be designed
to fit the specific needs of that type of trip.
Page 127
02-GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA SECOND EDITION - NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 140 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
A highway with a median width of 15 m [50 ft] or more has a very low incidence of head-on collisions
caused by vehicles crossing the median. With narrower medians, median barriers will eliminate
head-on collisions, but at the cost of some increase in same-direction crashes because recovery
space is decreased. Properly designed median barriers minimize vehicle damage and lessen the
crash severity. However, if a narrow median with a median barrier is proposed on a high-speed
highway, the design should include adequate shoulder widths in the median for emergency stops
and emergency vehicle use.
Another study relating crashes to shoulder width, alignment, and grade found that crash rates on
sections with curves or grades were much higher than on level tangent highway sections. Crashes
are likely to occur where drivers are called upon to make decisions under circumstances where their
vehicles are unable to respond properly, for example, where a truck is descending a grade. It would
be logical to expect more crashes on grades and curves than on level tangent highways where driver
decisions are needed less frequently and vehicles are fully responsive. However, design with tangent
alignment can be overdone.
On extremely long tangents, drivers have a tendency to completely relax, especially after driving on
a congested highway before entering a freeway. On some freeways, there has been concern over
the number of crashes that occur when the driver apparently goes to sleep. It is considered highly
desirable to provide gentle curvature and to avoid a fixed cross section for long tangent sections of
roadway. This can be achieved by varying the median width, using independent roadway alignments,
and taking advantage of the terrain, wherever practical. In addition, rumble strips can be added to
shoulders to reduce run-off-the-road crashes caused by drivers falling asleep at the wheel. As the
design of alignment, grade, and traveled-way cross section has improved, roadside design has also
become increasingly important. Crashes involving single vehicles running off the road constitute
more than one-half of all fatal crashes on freeways.
Basic to the concept of the forgiving roadside is the provision of a clear recovery area. Studies have
indicated that on high-speed highways, a relatively level traversable width of approximately 9 m from
the edge of the traveled way permits about 80 percent of the vehicles leaving the highway to safely
stop or return to the roadway. Even though the 9-m width is not a “magic number” and the application
of engineering judgment is necessary, the 9-m width has been used extensively as a guide for
recovery zones.
In roadside design, two major elements should be controlled by the designer: roadside slopes and
unyielding obstacles. On existing highways, the following priorities for treatment of roadside
obstacles are recommended:
• Remove the obstacle or redesign it so it can be safely traversed.
• Relocate the obstacle to a point where it is less likely to be struck.
• Reduce severity of impacts with the obstacle by using an appropriate breakaway device.
• Redirect a vehicle by shielding the obstacle with a longitudinal traffic barrier and/or crash cushion.
• Delineate the obstacle if the above alternatives are not appropriate.
The design of guardrails and barrier systems has become a subject of considerable research. DMT’s
Roadside Design Guide (TR-518) is one of many published reports that deal with this subject. These
publications note that the treatment of end sections on guardrail or a barrier is of particular concern.
The design team should assess their design against TR-518, the Emirate of Abu Dhabi Roadside
Design Guide to ensure roadside safety is properly considered.
Page 128
02-GENERAL DESIGN CRITERIA SECOND EDITION - NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 340 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
7.3.2.3 Typical Cross Section
Cross sections of depressed freeways may vary through urban areas, in particular, the number of
traffic lanes required. Another important factor is availability of right-of-way, which depends on the
type and value of urban development, topography, soil and drainage conditions, and the frequency
and type of interchanges to be used. The cross section should meet the design criteria presented in
Sections 3 and 7.7 for urban and rural freeways, respectively. Where there are physical or economic
constraints, it may be appropriate to vary certain design elements to fit the cross section within the
available right-of-way. Figure 7-8(a) shows a depressed freeway with adequate right-of-way.
Figure 7-8(b) illustrates a depressed freeway with retaining walls in restricted right-of-way. Although
the restricted cross section shown is acceptable, it should be used only where additional right-of-
way would be extremely costly or where this type of cross section is necessary to preserve the
surrounding environment.
Figure 7-8: Cross Sections for Depressed Freeways
Note: For cross section widths, see the geometric design tables in Sections 7.6 and 7.7.
Source: (1)
Page 328
07-RURAL & URBAN FREEWAYS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 341 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
7.3.3 Elevated Freeways
7.3.3.1 General Characteristics
In urban areas, elevated freeways should only be considered where restricted right-of-way, high-
water table, extensive underground utilities, close pattern of streets to be retained, terrain, or other
circumstances make construction of a depressed freeway undesirable and/or uneconomical. An
elevated freeway may be constructed on either a viaduct or an embankment. Consider the following:
1. Viaduct. Viaduct designs are influenced by traffic demands, right-of-way, topography,
foundation conditions, urban development, interchange needs, availability of materials,
and economic considerations. Figure 7-9 shows a freeway on viaduct. Because of
these multiple considerations, viaducts are the most difficult of all freeway types to fit
harmoniously into the environment.
Support columns for viaducts are positioned to provide clearance on each side and to leave
the ground-level area free for other use. This design has the following advantages:
• practically all cross streets can be left open with little or no added expense;
• existing utilities that cross the freeway right-of-way are minimally disturbed; and
• surface traffic on cross streets usually can be maintained during construction with
few, if any, detours.
Figure 7-9: Freeway on a Viaduct (Al Wahda Street – Sharjah)
The space under the structure can be used for surface-street traffic, for parking, or for a tram
or transit line. The area under the viaduct may also have a high potential value to the
community for joint development or other use, which may range from playgrounds to major
buildings. The disadvantages with the viaduct design include high costs for maintaining the
Page 329
07-RURAL & URBAN FREEWAYS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 342 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
structure and its closed drainage system, difficulty in obtaining a pleasant appearance, and
need for added police protection in the undeveloped space beneath the structure.
2. Embankment. Freeways on embankments are feasible in outer urban areas where
crossing streets are widely spaced and where wide right-of-way and fill material are
available. An elevated freeway on an earth embankment should be of sufficient height
to permit intersecting surface roads to pass under it. Usually, an embankment section
occurs on a combination-type freeway in rolling terrain where excavation material from
depressed portions is used for the embankment. A roadside barrier generally will be
warranted when the embankment slopes are greater than 1V:3H. The sloped areas
may be planted to improve the appearance of the freeway.
Where appropriate, the fill may be confined by partial- or full-height retaining walls on one or
both sides. With retaining walls, the total width may be reduced to widths comparable to
elevated structures on viaducts. Special wall treatment or planting of trees and shrubs may
make retaining walls aesthetically pleasing.
7.3.3.2 Typical Cross Section
The total widths of elevated freeway sections can vary considerably. For elevated freeways on
embankments, the total width is about the same as the total width needed for depressed freeways.
Elevated freeways on structures may be cantilevered over parallel roadways or sidewalks.
Figure 7-10 illustrates an elevated viaduct freeway, where:
• Figure 7-10(a) shows the elevated freeway supported by columns on each side with at-grade
service roads on the outsides of the columns.
• Figure 7-10(b) displays a cross section for a stacked freeway with the opposing traffic on top
of each other. Due to the high cost and inability to expand the freeway in the future, this
design should only be considered in very constrained right-of-way.
• Figure 7-10(c) illustrates where it may desirable to include separated special use lanes (e.g.,
HOV lanes, transit lanes) within a restricted right-of-way. The special use lanes are
cantilevered over the through lanes for the freeway.
• Figure 7-10(d) shows typical cross section for where the through lanes are elevated on
separate structures. It also shows ramps transiting in height between the elevated freeway
and at-grade service roads.
Figure 7-11(a) shows a typical cross section for an elevated freeway on an embankment with at-
grade service roads. Figure 7-11(b) shows the use a retaining wall for restricted conditions.
Page 330
07-RURAL & URBAN FREEWAYS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 343 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
Figure 7-10: Typical Viaduct Cross Sections for Elevated Freeways
Source: (1)
Figure 7-11: Typical Embankment Cross Sections for Elevated Freeways
Note: For cross section widths, see the geometric design tables in Sections 7.6 and 7.7.
Source: (1)
Page 331
07-RURAL & URBAN FREEWAYS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 344 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
7.3.4 Combination-Type Freeways
7.3.4.1 General Characteristics
Typical, urban freeways will incorporate some combination of depressed, elevated, or ground level
designs. Combination-type freeways result from variations in profile or cross section.
7.3.4.2 Profile Control
The terrain will generally determine the type profile control required. The designer should consider
the following:
1. Rolling Terrain. The typical profile of a combination-type freeway in rolling terrain is
shown in Figure 7-12. The best profile is usually developed by underpassing some
cross streets and overpassing others. The facility is neither generally depressed nor
elevated, although for short lengths it incorporates the design principles for fully
depressed or fully elevated roadways. For example, in Figure 7-12, at A and C the
facility is depressed, at B it is elevated on an earth embankment, and at each end at
ground level.
Figure 7-12: Combination Freeway in Rolling Terrain
Source: (1)
2. Level Terrain. Figure 7-13 shows a variation of a combination-type freeway in level
terrain. The roadway profile closely follows the existing ground between the grade
separation structures. The freeway also overpasses important cross streets by rolling
the gradeline to the appropriate height above the surface streets; where practical, cross
streets are carried over the freeway (as at A in Figure 7-13). This combination-type
freeway design is suitable for level terrain where soil and groundwater conditions or
underground utilities preclude depressing the freeway mostly below the existing
ground, or continuous viaduct construction is too costly or is otherwise objectionable.
The freeway may be carried over a cross street on an earth embankment with a
conventional grade separation structure (as at B in Figure 7-13) or on a relatively long
structure (as at C in Figure 7-13). The factors that control the profile design are the
availability of fill material and the soil conditions. This freeway design permits parallel
or diagonal ramps to be provided between the grade separations
Figure 7-13: Profile Control — Combination-Type Freeway in Level Terrain
Source: (1)
Page 332
07-RURAL & URBAN FREEWAYS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 345 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
One of the disadvantages of this design is that a roller coaster-type of profile results where
several successive cross streets are overpassed at close intervals. This situation is more
pronounced on horizontal tangents where drivers can see two or more grade separations
ahead. A moving vehicle that is ahead of a driver may disappear into dips and reappear again
as the grade rises to a crest. Therefore, designer should design the profile to eliminate dips
that would limit the sight distance. Ensure adequate sight distance is provided to the exit
ramps. Where truck traffic is heavy, maximum grades of approximately 2% are desirable to
prevent queuing at the base of the grade.
To minimise the overall rise and fall and make the rolling profile less pronounced, the cross
streets may be depressed several meters below the ground surface and the freeway grade
may be raised several meters above the ground level between grade separation structures.
The profile may be further improved by raising some cross streets to overpass the freeway.
Minimum governing distances for grade separation design are discussed in Section 7.5.2.3.
7.3.4.3 Cross-Section Control
The examples in Figure 7-14 are also considered combination-type freeways, but the primary
influence on their design is the cross section. These special designs usually apply to relatively short
lengths of roadway to meet specific conditions.
7.3.5 Special Freeway Designs
7.3.5.1 Reverse-Flow Freeways
Special conditions may warrant the use of a reverse-flow roadway as a part of the freeway design.
This is usually accomplished by placing a separate reversible roadway within the normal median
area, as shown in Figure 7-15. Reverse-flow roadways are advantageous in that they may have
unused capacity much of the time because of the limited numbers of access points. The costs of
construction, maintenance, and operation of a freeway with a reverse-flow roadway may also differ
considerably from those of a conventional freeway.
A separate reverse-flow roadway may be considered where:
• the directional distribution during peak hours is substantially unbalanced (e.g. a 65:35 split)
and capacity analysis indicates a need for a conventional facility more than eight lanes (4+4)
wide;
• design controls and right-of-way limitations are such that providing two or more parallel
facilities on separate rights-of-way is not practical; and
• a sizable portion of traffic in the predominant direction during peak hours is destined for an
area between the central portions of the city or another area of concentrated development
and the outlying area (i.e. a large percentage of peak-hour traffic travels a long distance
between principal points of origin and destination with little or no need for intermediate
interchanges).
In some areas, demand may be sufficiently great to justify the use of a reversible roadway exclusively
for buses or other high-occupancy vehicles.
Page 333
07-RURAL & URBAN FREEWAYS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 346 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
Figure 7-14: Combination-Type Freeways with Restricted Right-of-Way
Note: For cross section widths, see the geometric design tables in Sections 7.6 and 7.7.
Figure 7-15: Typical Cross Sections for Reverse-Flow Operation
Source: (1)
Page 334
07-RURAL & URBAN FREEWAYS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 347 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
7.3.5.2 Dual-Divided Freeways
Where more than a 4+4 design is required and the directional distribution of traffic is sufficiently
balanced so that a reversible roadway is not appropriate, a dual-divided freeway made up of two-
one-way carriageways in each direction of travel may provide the optimum facility. See Figure 7-16
and Figure 7-17. All four roadways are within the control-of-access lines. This type of cross section
is sometimes referred to as “dual-dual.” The outer freeway roadways usually serve the local
interchange traffic, but they may also serve a substantial portion of the through traffic. For example,
all trucks might be required to use the outer roadways only. Various arrangements are possible,
depending on the character of traffic and crossroad conditions.
Figure 7-16: Typical Cross Sections for Dual-Divided Operation
Figure 7-17: Dual-Divided Freeway
Dual-divided freeways usually function smoothly and carry extremely high volumes of traffic
efficiently. Motorists using the inner roadways are removed from the weaving movement at
frequently spaced interchanges, and disabled vehicles in either the inner or the outer roadway can
quickly be moved to a shoulder.
Page 335
07-RURAL & URBAN FREEWAYS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 348 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
Where the future need can be anticipated and sufficient right-of-way can be reserved, it may be
practical to develop a dual-divided facility in two stages. Dual-divided construction may be the most
practical solution to widening an existing freeway where the present traffic volumes are so great that
the disruption in traffic during complete reconstruction cannot be tolerated.
Dual-divided facilities have great flexibility in their operation and maintenance. For example, during
maintenance or reconstruction operations, one of the directional roadways may be temporarily
closed during off-peak hours. Crash potential is greatly reduced by eliminating traffic conflicts with
construction or maintenance work. Another advantage of dual-divided design is that the affected
roadway can also be closed in case of a crash or other emergency, thereby facilitating clean-up
operations.
Disadvantages of dual-divided facilities are the wide expanse of pavement and heavy traffic volumes
that may disrupt an established community and tend to limit the continuity of the surrounding area.
The dual-roadway system reduces the flexibility of traffic distribution, resulting in uneven distribution
among lanes. The costs for right-of-way, construction, and maintenance may be greater than those
on a normal divided facility with an equal number of lanes.
7.3.5.3 Freeways with Collector-Distributor Roadways
An arrangement having cross-sectional elements similar to the dual-divided freeway is a freeway
with a collector-distributor (C-D) roadway system. The purpose of a C-D road is to eliminate weaving
on the mainline freeway lanes and reduce the number of entrance and exit points on the through
roadways while satisfying the demand for access to and from the freeway. C-D roadways may be
provided within a single interchange (as discussed in Section 12.5.2), through two adjacent
interchanges, or continuously through several interchanges of a freeway segment. See Figure 7-18
and Figure 7-19. Continuous C-D roads are similar to continuous service roads except that access
to abutting property is not permitted.
The inside lanes are for the high-speed through traffic and the outside slower speed roadways are
identified as C-D roads. Usually, the traffic volumes on the C-D system are less than those
encountered on the dual-divided freeway, with fewer lanes. The minimum lane arrangement for a C-
D system is two C-D lanes, 2+2 dual carriageway, and two C-D lanes. Other combinations may be
developed as capacity needs warrant. Continuous C-D roadways should be integrated into a basic
lane design to develop an overall system. Conduct a capacity analysis and basic lane determination
for the overall system rather than just for the separate roadways.
Connections between the through roadways and C-D roadways are called “transfer roads.” Transfer
roads may be either one or two lanes in width. The principle of lane balance applies to the design of
transfer roads on both the through and C-D roadways. Both transfer and C-D roads should have
shoulders equal in width to those of the through roadway. The outer separation should be as wide
as practical with an appropriate barrier. Terminals of transfer roads should be designed in
accordance with guidelines for ramp terminals, as presented in Section 12.6.
The design speed of C-D roadways is usually less than that of the through roadway because most
of the turbulence caused by weaving occurs on the C-D roadways. A reduction in design speed of
no more than 20 km/h is preferable for continuous C-D roadway systems.
Page 336
07-RURAL & URBAN FREEWAYS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 349 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
Figure 7-18: Abu Dhabi Freeway with C-D Roadway
Figure 7-19: Dubai Freeway with C-D Roadways
Page 337
07-RURAL & URBAN FREEWAYS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 350 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
7.4 General Design Considerations
7.4.1 Design Speed
As a general consideration, the design speed should be consistent with the anticipated operating
speed of the freeway during both peak and non-peak hours, but the design speed should not be so
high as to exceed the limits of prudent construction, right-of-way, and socioeconomic costs. For rural
freeways, the design speed should be 120 km/h to 140 km/h and, for urban freeways, 100 km/h to
120 km/h. In mountainous terrain, a design speed of 80 km/h to 100 km/h is consistent with driver
expectancy.
On many urban freeways, particularly in developing areas, a design speed of 100 km/h or higher
can be provided with little additional cost. Where the freeway corridor is relatively straight, the
character of the roadway and location of interchanges may be consistent with a higher design speed.
Under these conditions, a design speed 120 km/h is desirable, because higher design speeds are
closely related to the overall quality of a facility.
7.4.2 Design Traffic Volumes
Both rural and urban freeways should normally be designed to accommodate traffic projections for
a 20-year period into the future, particularly for new construction. However, some elements of
freeway reconstruction may be based on a shorter design period. Specific capacity needs should be
determined from directional design hourly volumes (DDHV) for the appropriate design period. In
large metropolitan areas, the selection of appropriate design traffic volumes and design periods may
be influenced by system planning. Segments of freeways may be constructed or reconstructed to be
commensurate with either intermediate traffic demands or with traffic based on the completed
system, whichever may be more appropriate.
7.4.3 Capacity Analysis
Procedures for traffic operational analyses for freeways, including appropriate adjustments for
operational and roadway factors, are presented in the Highway Capacity Manual 2010 (17).
7.4.3.1 Freeway Segments
Freeways are composed of the following segments that are analysed to determine the overall
capacity and level of service (LOS) freeway:
1. Freeway Merge and Diverge Segments. These are segments in which two or more
traffic streams combine to form a single traffic stream (merge) (entrance ramps) or
where a single traffic stream divides to form two or more separate traffic streams
(diverge) (exit ramps). Section 12.6.3 provides guidance on capacity analyses for
merge and diverge segments.
2. Freeway Weaving Segments. These are segments in which two or more traffic streams
travelling in the same general direction cross paths along a significant length of freeway
without the aid of traffic control devices (except for guide signs). Weaving segments
are formed where a diverge segment closely follows a merge segment or where a one-
lane exit ramp closely follows a one-lane entrance ramp and the two are connected by
a continuous auxiliary lane. Section 12.3.13 provides guidance on capacity analyses
for weaving segments.
Page 338
07-RURAL & URBAN FREEWAYS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 351 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
3. Basic Freeway Segments. These segments are between the merge, diverge, or
weaving segments.
7.4.3.2 Influence Areas
It is important that the definition of freeway segments and their influence areas be clearly understood.
The influence areas of merge, diverge, and weaving segments are as follows:
1. Weaving Segment. This influence area includes the base length of the weaving
segment plus 150 m upstream of the entry point to the weaving segment and 150 m
downstream of the exit point from the weaving segment; entry and exit points are
defined as the points where the appropriate edges of the merging and diverging lanes
meet. See Figure 12-7.
2. Merge Segment. This influence area is measure from the point where the edges of the
travel lanes of the merging roadways meet to a point 450 m downstream from that point.
See Figure 12-7.
3. Diverging Segment. This influence area is measure from the point where the edges of
the travel lanes of the merging roadways meet to a point 450 m upstream from that
point. See Figure 12-7
7.4.3.3 Base Capacity
The base capacity represents the capacity of the facility, assuming that there are no heavy vehicles
in the traffic stream and that all drivers are regular users of the segment. The base capacity for all
freeway segments varies with the free-flow speed. See Figure 7-20 shows a sample speed-flow
curves for a basic freeway section in the United States. The base lane capacity in Abu Dhabi for a
freeway segment is assumed 2200 pc/h/ln. Note that this is less than the base capacity of 2400
pc/h/ln provided in the Highway Capacity Manual (17). To determine the actual lane capacity, use
base capacity 2200 pc/h/ln and the methodologies as presented in the Highway Capacity Manual
2010 (17).
7.4.3.4 Level of Service
Because LOS for basic, weaving, merge, and diverge segments on a freeway is defined in terms of
density, LOS for a freeway facility is also defined based on density. A facility analysis will result in a
density determination and LOS for each component segment. The facility LOS will be based on the
weighted average density for all segments with the defined facility. Weighting is done based on
segment length and the number of lanes in each segment.
The LOS densities for a freeway facility and basic freeway segments are shown in Table 7-1.
Guidance for merge and diverge segments, weaving areas, and ramps is provided in Chapter 12
“Interchanges.”
Freeways should generally be designed so that acceptable levels of congestion are not exceeded;
desirably LOS B, with minimum LOS C. Freeway auxiliary facilities (i.e. ramps, mainline weaving
sections, collector-distributor (C-D) roads) may be design with a LOS one level lower than the
freeway segment if the overall freeway still meets the design LOS. In heavily developed sections of
metropolitan areas, achieving level of service C may not be practical and the use of level of service
D may be appropriate.
Page 339
07-RURAL & URBAN FREEWAYS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 352 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
Figure 7-20: Sample Speed-Flow Curves for Basic Freeway Section
Source: (36)
Table 7-1: LOS Criteria for Freeway Facilities
LOS Density (PC/mi/ln)
A ≤ 11
B > 11 – 18
C > 18 – 26
D > 26 – 35
E > 35 – 45
F > 45 or any component v /c ratio > 1.00
d
Note: 1 Mile = 1.6 Km Sources: (17) / (36)
7.4.4 Travelled Way and Shoulders
The minimum freeway design should be a 2+2 dual carriageway. Through-traffic lanes should be
3.65 m wide. Freeway roadways should have a paved surface with adequate skid resistance and
structural capacity. Pavement cross slopes should be 2% sloping away from the median. Guidance
for ramp travelled-way widths are provided in Section 12.5.6.
Page 340
07-RURAL & URBAN FREEWAYS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 353 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
Paved shoulders should be continuous on both the right and left sides of all freeway facilities.
Shoulder widths on freeways are as follows:
1. 2+2. The median (or left) shoulder is normally 1.8 m wide (only if the ultimate design is
a 2+2 freeway), at least 1.2 m of which should be paved and the remainder stabilized.
The paved width of the right shoulder should be at least 3.0 m. Where the DDHV for
truck traffic exceeds 250 veh/h, provide a paved right shoulder width of 3.65 m.
2. 3+3 or More. The paved width of the right and left shoulder should be 3.0 m. Where the
DDHV for truck traffic exceeds 250 veh/h, provide a paved right shoulder width of 3.65
m.
3. Ramps. Guidance for ramp shoulder widths is provided in Section 12.5.6. Ramp
shoulder widths are usually provided adjacent to acceleration and deceleration lanes
with transitions to the freeway shoulder width at the taper ends.
7.4.5 Curbs
Caution should be exercised in the use of curbs on freeways. Where curbs are provided in special
cases, they should not be closer to the travelled way than the outer edge of shoulder and should be
easily traversable. An example of a special case in which shoulder curbs are used on freeways is at
locations where curbs are provided to control drainage and reduce erosion. For more information,
refer to the discussion on curb types and their placement in Section 3.2.6 and the Abu Dhabi
Roadside Design Guide (28).
7.4.6 Superelevation
The desirable superelevation rate on freeways is 4%, with a maximum rate of 6%. See Section 5.3
for further guidance.
7.4.7 Grades
Maximum grades for freeways are presented in Table 7-2 for combinations of design speed and
terrain type. Grades on urban freeways should be comparable to those on rural freeways of the
same design speed. Steeper grades may be tolerated in urban areas, but the closer spacing of
interchange facilities and the need for frequent speed changes make it desirable to use flatter grades
wherever practical. On sustained upgrades, the need for climbing lanes should be investigated, as
discussed in Section 6.3.
Table 7-2: Maximum Grades for Rural and Urban Freeways
Design Speeds (km/h)
Type of
80 90 100 110 120 130 140*
Terrain
Grades (%)*
Level 4 4 3 3 3 3 3
Rolling 5 5 4 4 4 4 4
Mountainous 6 6 6 5 — — —
* Grades 1% steeper than the value shown may be provided in urban areas with right-of-way constraints or
where needed in mountainous terrain.
* Estimated by DMT. Source: (1)
Page 341
07-RURAL & URBAN FREEWAYS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 354 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
7.4.8 Structures
The design of bridges, culverts, walls, tunnels, and other structures should be in accordance with
the principles in the Abu Dhabi Road Structures Design Manual (29).
The clear width on bridges carrying freeway traffic should be as wide as the approach roadway. On
bridges longer than 60 m, some economy in substructure costs may be gained by building a single
structure rather than twin parallel structures. In such cases, the approach shoulder widths are
provided and a median barrier is extended across the bridge.
Structures carrying ramps should provide a clear width equal to the ramp width and paved shoulders.
The structure width and lateral clearance of roadways overpassing or underpassing the freeway are
dependent on the roadway classifications as discussed in Chapter 8 “Rural Roads” and Chapter 9
“Urban Streets.”
7.4.9 Vertical Clearance
The vertical clearance to roadway structures, sign trusses, and pedestrian overpasses over freeways
should be at least 6.5 m over the entire roadway width, including auxiliary lanes and the usable width
of shoulders with consideration for future resurfacing. Where the freeway passes over a railroad,
provide a vertical clearance of 7.5 m.
7.4.10 Roadside Design
Urban freeways at ground level and rural freeways should have clear zone widths consistent with
their operating speed, traffic volume, and side slopes. Detailed discussions of clear zones and lateral
offsets are discussed in the Abu Dhabi Roadside Design Guide (28).
Depressed freeways in urban areas have more restrictive rights-of-way, which may require retaining
walls or bridge piers to be placed within the clear zone. Retaining walls and piers should not be
located on the shoulder and preferably should be at least 0.6 m beyond the outer edge of shoulder.
Retaining walls and pier crash walls should incorporate an integral concrete barrier shape, or offset
from the shoulder to permit shielding with a separate barrier. Where walls are located beyond the
clear zone or are not required, back slopes should be traversable and fixed objects within the clear
zone should be of a breakaway design or shielded.
Elevated freeways on embankments generally warrant roadside barriers where slopes are steeper
than 1V:3H or where the area beyond the toe of slope that remains within the clear zone is not
traversable. The tops of retaining walls used in conjunction with embankment sections should be
located no closer to the roadway than the outer edge of the shoulder, and the walls should
incorporate the concrete barrier shape or be appropriately shielded.
7.4.11 Ramps and Terminals
The design of ramps and connections for all freeway types is covered in Section 12.5 and Section
12.6, respectively.
7.4.12 Outer Separations and Borders
An outer separation is defined as the area between the travelled way of the main lanes and a service
(frontage) road or local street. A border is defined as the area between the service road or local
Page 342
07-RURAL & URBAN FREEWAYS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 355 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
street and the private development along the road. Where there are no service roads or local streets
functioning as service roads, the area between the travelled way of the main lanes and the right-of-
way limit should be referred to as the border. Because of the dense development along urban
freeways, service roads are often necessary to maintain local service and to collect and distribute
ramp traffic entering and leaving the freeway. Where the freeway occupies a full block, the adjacent
parallel streets are usually retained as service roads.
The outer separation or border provides space for shoulders, verges, side slopes, drainage, access-
control fencing, service areas, and in urban areas, retaining walls and ramps. In sensitive areas, the
outer separation or border may also provide space for noise abatement measures. Usually, the outer
separation is the most flexible element of an urban freeway section. Adjustment in width of right-of-
way, as may be needed through developed areas, ordinarily is made by varying the width of the
outer separation.
The outer separation or border should be as wide as economically practical to provide a buffer zone
between the freeway and its adjacent area. The border should extend beyond the construction limits,
where practical, to facilitate maintenance operations and encourage an effective roadside design.
Wide outer separations also permit well-designed ramps between the freeway and the service road.
The typical range in widths of outer separations is 25 m to 50 m, but much narrower widths may be
used in urban areas if retaining walls are employed.
7.4.13 Access Control
A freeway should have no disruptions or traffic stopped at crossroads anywhere along the route. All
opposing traffic movements are separated by physical constraints (e.g. grade separations, non-
traversable median separators). Access to the freeway is by directional ramps. All ramps should be
suitably spaced and designed to provide the minimum differential between the speed of the through
traffic stream and the speed of the merging or diverging vehicles.
Private direct access to a freeway is prohibited. Abutting property must access the freeway via a
secondary roadway network. Any direct access for construction activity must be within the authorised
project construction zone and in accordance with approved traffic control plans.
For interchanges in rural areas, a spacing of 8 km is preferred, with an interchange minimum spacing
distance of 4 km. See the Abu Dhabi Access Management Policy and Procedures Manual (21) for
further guidance. The separation between on on-ramps and the next downstream off-ramp is the
most critical distance in consideration of spacing. Interchange centreline spacing criteria cannot
anticipate how topography and other conditions may result in ramps too closely spaced. A traditional
cloverleaf is undesirable as the ramp activity overlaps. On rural roadways, there should be over 2000
m between gore points.
A minimum spacing of 2 km between interchanges is preferred in urban areas. Where there is a
heavy on-ramp volume followed by a high off-ramp volume, a greater spacing is desirable.
Sequential off-ramps can be closer together, but not for sequential on-ramps. Where there is a high
frequency of trucks and buses, acceleration lanes should be twice the normal distance.
Right-turn-only ramps are allowed when there is a necessity for a low-volume isolated access (e.g.
official utility installation) or traveller service area (e.g. gas station, rest area) directly related to the
right-of-way use or travel support.
Page 343
07-RURAL & URBAN FREEWAYS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 356 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
Parking is not permitted along freeway roadways or in the roadside area.
Official stopping areas including rest stops, filling stations with public facilities and shops must be
outside the roadway limits (i.e. beyond the roadway right of way). The ramps for these facilities must
be spaced and designed in the same manner as interchange ramps; see Section 12.3.3. Where
practical, public facilities should be on both sides of the road; otherwise, there may be incidents of
vehicles crossing the median. Design the freeway median to discourage crossover activities.
Public facilities for public transport stops, pedestrian crossings, footways, and cycle lanes must be
grade separated or there must be a physical barrier between the freeway roadway and the other
public facility.
Within the general corridor area of the freeway, there should always be a parallel secondary route
for non-freeway travel. This can be in the form of service roads and other secondary classifications.
In extremely low population areas, secondary systems may be isolated ending at freeway access
points; see Figure 7-21.
Figure 7-21: Isolated Freeway Access
Page 344
07-RURAL & URBAN FREEWAYS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 357 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
7.5 Grade Separation Design
On fully access-controlled facilities, each intersecting roadway must be terminated, rerouted, or
provided with a grade separation or interchange. The importance of the continuity of the crossing
road, the feasibility of alternative routes, traffic volumes, construction costs, environmental impacts,
etc., must be evaluated to determine the option that is the most cost effective.
7.5.1 Justification
Section 12.2 provides guidelines that must be considered in determining whether an interchange
should be provided. In general, interchanges are provided at all freeway-to-freeway crossings and
at other roadways based on the anticipated demand for access.
For each crossroad along the freeway, which is not an interchange, a determination must be made
whether the crossroad should be closed, rerouted, or provided with a grade separation. This
justification is made primarily by comparing the respective cost and social factors for each
alternative. Figure 7-22 shows a grade separated crossing. Although cost is a primary factor, also
consider the following:
Figure 7-22: Grade Separated Freeway Crossing
1. Operations. Grade separations should be of sufficient number and adequate capacity
to accommodate crossroad traffic, traffic diverted to crossroads from other roads and
streets terminated by the freeway, and the traffic generated by access connections to
and from the mainline.
2. Rural/Urban Locations. In rural areas, the location of grade separation structures is
determined by an access and feasibility study. For urban areas, usually grade
separation structures are provided every three to four blocks for continuity.
3. Local Considerations. Closing the crossroad can have a significant effect on local users
and the overall local road system integrity, due primarily to changes in travel patterns.
These may include:
Page 345
07-RURAL & URBAN FREEWAYS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 358 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
a. Emergency Personnel. The financial effect of the longer detour route on emergency
vehicles is generally not a concern. However, the extra response time could adversely
affect the health and safety of local citizens.
b. Businesses. Evaluate access to businesses to ensure that these operations can
continue without severe economic hardship. Road closures can significantly affect
their deliveries and the number of customers they receive (e.g. customers may be
unwilling to travel the extra distance).
c. Social Factors. Parks, mosques, cemeteries, public facilities, and other areas or
buildings of social concern generally cannot be relocated. Limited access to these
facilities may create undue hardship if a specific road is closed.
d. Land Use Planning. Consider future land use within an urban environment to ensure
adequate access and reciprocation factors are available.
7.5.2 Design
7.5.2.1 Structure Type
Varieties of structures are used for grade separation of intersections highways. Similar to an
overcrossing roadway, the full roadway approach width should be carried through the undercrossing,
including roadside barriers. Figure 7-23 illustrates several variations for carrying the freeway cross
section through the underpass:
Figure 7-23: Typical Cross Sections for Underpasses
Source: (36)
Page 346
07-RURAL & URBAN FREEWAYS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 359 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
• Figure 7-23(a) shows a bridge with solid abutments. The left side fits a walled section on the
roadway approach; the right side intercepts the side slope.
• Figure 7-23(b) shows a structure with open-end spans.
• Figure 7-23(c) illustrates where the side slopes of partial height pass through the structures.
This design provides the approaching driver a greater degree of openness with la less
constricting and safer roadside.
• Figure 7-23(d) is an extension of Figure 7-23(c) where the entire cross section of the freeway
is spanned. A greater sense of openness is produce.
7.5.2.2 Over Versus Under
A thorough study should be completed for each proposed roadway grade separation to conclude
whether the major roadway should be over or under the other road(s). The main issues that dictate
whether a road should be carried over or under usually fall into one of the following:
• topography predominates, which should lead to a design that is fitted to it;
• the topography does not help one design; and
• the grade-line and alignment of one roadway predominate, and so the final design should
accommodate that roadway’s alignment instead of the site topography.
Figure 7-24 illustrates roundabout interchanges with the freeway above and below the roundabout.
Figure 7-24: Roundabout Interchanges with Freeway Over and Under
Typically, a design that is in line with the existing topography is also the most economical and
aesthetically pleasing. This factor should usually be considered first. Otherwise, it is appropriate to
study the following secondary factors:
1. The Whole Interchange. For the most part, designers are governed by the need for economy,
which is obtained by designs that fit existing topography, not only along the intersecting
highways but also for the whole of the area to be used for ramps and slopes. Thus, it is
Page 347
07-RURAL & URBAN FREEWAYS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 360 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
appropriate to consider alternatives in the interchange area as a whole to decide whether the
major road should go over or under the crossroad.
2. Approach View. An undercrossing highway has a general advantage in that an approaching
interchange may be easily seen by drivers. As a driver approaches, the structure appears
ahead, making the presence of the upper-level crossroad obvious, and providing advance
warning of the likely presence of interchange ramps.
3. Aesthetics. Through traffic is given aesthetic preference by a layout in which the more
important road is the overpass. A wide overlook can be provided from the structure and its
approaches, giving drivers a minimum feeling of restriction.
4. Turning Traffic. Where turning traffic is significant, the ramp profiles are best fitted when the
major road is at the lower level. The ramp grades then assist turning vehicles to decelerate
as they leave the major roadway and to accelerate as they approach it, rather than the
reverse. In addition, for diamond interchanges the ramp terminal is visible to drivers as they
leave the major roadway.
5. Terrain. In rolling topography or in rugged terrain, major-road overcrossings may be
attainable only by a forced alignment and rolling gradeline. Where there otherwise is no
pronounced advantage to the selection of an underpass or overpass, the design that provides
the better sight distance on the major road should be preferred.
6. Stage Construction. An overpass offers the best possibility for stage construction, both in the
roadway and structure, with minimum impairment of the original investment. The initial
development of only part of the ultimate width is a complete structure and roadway in itself.
By lateral extension of both or construction of a separate structure and roadway for a dual
carriageway, the ultimate development is reached without loss of the initial facility.
7. Drainage. Drainage challenges may be reduced by carrying the major roadway over the
crossroad without altering the crossroad grade. In some cases, the drainage concerns alone
may be sufficient reason for choosing to carry the major roadway over rather than under the
crossroad.
8. Economics. The cost of bridges and approaches may determine whether the major roadway
underpasses or overpasses the minor facility. A cost analysis that takes into account the
bridge type, span length, roadway cross section, angle of skew, soil conditions, and cost of
approaches will determine which of the two intersecting roadways should be placed on
structure.
9. Earthwork. An underpass may be more advantageous where the major road can be built
close to the existing ground, with continuous gradient and with no pronounced grade
changes. Where the widths of the roads differ greatly, the quantity of earthwork makes this
arrangement more economical. Because the minor road usually is built to less generous
design criteria than the major road, grades on it may be steeper and sight distances shorter,
with resultant economy in grading volume and pavement area on the shorter length of road
to be rebuilt above the general level of the surrounding country.
10. Freeway System. Frequently, the choice of an underpass at a particular location is
determined not by conditions at that location, but by the design of the freeway as a whole.
Page 348
07-RURAL & URBAN FREEWAYS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------
