Source PDF: C:\Users\HP\Desktop\backend\mi3ar\miyar_frontend\src\images\TR-514.pdf

=== TARGET PAGES ===

--- PAGE 558 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
Figure 11-10: Multilane Roundabout
11.4 Roundabout Considerations
11.4.1 Planning
At the planning stage, there are a variety of possible reasons or goals for considering a roundabout
at a particular intersection. These may include:
• improving safety or operations,
• improving aesthetics,
• assisting with access management, and
• promoting redevelopment.
Whatever the reasons for considering a roundabout, a number of common considerations should be
addressed at the planning level:
• Is a roundabout appropriate for this location?
• How big should it be or how many lanes might be required?
• What sort of impacts might be expected?
• What public education and outreach might be appropriate?
Page 546
11-ROUNDABOUTS SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 588 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
12 INTERCHANGES
12.1 Overview
An interchange is a system of interconnecting roadways in conjunction with one or more grade
separations that provide for the movement of traffic between two or more roadways on different
levels. The operational efficiency, capacity, safety, and cost of the roadway facility are largely
dependent upon its design. Chapter 12 provides guidance in the design of interchanges including
interchange types, selection, layout, operations, spacing, lane drops, freeway ramp terminals,
ramps, and ramp/crossroad terminals. Information that is also applicable to interchanges is included
in the following chapters:
• Chapter 10 “Intersections” discusses intersection designs, including left-turn lanes,
channelizing islands, turning radii, design vehicles, etc.
• Chapter 7 “Rural and Urban Freeways” discusses freeway types, freeway design criteria,
grade separations, and access control along the freeway.
12.2 Warrants
The need for an interchange will vary based on site-specific conditions. Consider the following
guidelines when determining the need for an interchange:
1. Access Control. The Abu Dhabi Access Management Policy and Procedures Manual
(21) provides guidance on access control. The designer should note the following:
a. Full Access Control. On all fully access-controlled facilities, intersecting crossroads
must be terminated, rerouted, provided a grade separation, or provided an
interchange. The importance of the continuity of the crossroad, the feasibility of an
alternative route, traffic volumes, construction costs, environmental impacts, etc., are
evaluated in order to determine which option is most practical. Interchanges generally
are provided at:
• all freeway-to-freeway crossings;
• all major roads, unless determined inappropriate; and
• other roads based on the anticipated demand for regional access.
b. Partial Access Control. On facilities with partial access control (expressways),
intersections with public roads will be accommodated by an interchange or with an
intersection. Grade separations are rarely provided. Interchanges should be
constructed or planned at most major crossroads.
c. No Access Control. On a facility with no access control, the need for an interchange
will be determined on a case-by-case basis emphasising cost effectiveness, safety,
and operations. A road-user benefit analysis will generally be required to determine
the economic feasibility of an interchange. See Item 5. However, this analysis alone
is not sufficient justification for the provision of an interchange.
Page 576
12-INTERCHANGES SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 589 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
2. Congestion. Consider providing an interchange where the level of service (LOS) at an
intersection is unacceptable and the intersection cannot be redesigned to operate at an
acceptable LOS.
3. Safety. In special cases, consider the crash reduction benefits of an interchange at an
existing intersection that exhibits extremely high-crash frequencies and rates.
4. Site Topography. Where access is necessary, the topography may dictate an interchange or
a grade separation rather than an intersection.
5. Road-User Benefits. If an analysis reveals that road-user benefits over the service life of the
interchange will exceed costs, then an interchange may be considered. The designer must
consider all costs including right-of-way, construction, maintenance, and user costs in the
analysis. For additional guidance, the designer may refer to AASHTO User and Non-User
Benefit Analysis for Highways (53).
6. Access. An interchange may be required in an area where access availability from other
sources is not practical, and the freeway is the only facility that serves the area.
7. Traffic Volumes. Although there are no specific traffic volumes that warrant an interchange,
consider providing an interchange where the traffic volumes at an intersection are at or near
capacity, and where other improvements are not practical.
8. Urban Streets. For urban grade separations, prior approval from DMT, DMT, and the local
municipality is required. Ensure the separation does not adversely impact the surrounding
urban context.
12.3 General Design Considerations
12.3.1 System and Service Interchanges
Interchange configurations are divided into two general categories: system and service
interchanges. System interchanges connect a freeway to another freeway or roadways, whereas
service interchanges connect a freeway to an arterial, collector, or local roadway. Several
configurations of system and service interchanges are shown on Figure 12-1. System interchanges
include three- and four- leg directional and trumpet configurations. Service interchange
configurations include full and partial clover-leafs, and diamonds.
System interchange designs permit high-speed operation on ramps and typically include major
merge and diverge areas on both intersecting roadways. Major merges and diverges typically
operate with less turbulence than ramp merge or diverge areas. Service interchanges include lower
speed ramp merge and diverge areas, and may include weaving segments on the freeway and
crossroad, as well as signalised or unsignalised ramp-crossroad intersections. Table 12-1
summarises the operational features for various interchange configurations. The number of
operational features (e.g. diverge/merge areas, weaving areas, ramp/crossroad intersections) are
noted for each configuration. For instance, a four-lane directional configuration has four major merge
and four major diverge areas, as compared to a full cloverleaf that has two ramp merges, two ramp
diverges, and two weave sections on the freeway and crossroad.
Page 577
12-INTERCHANGES SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 598 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
Figure 12-8: Auxiliary Lanes Within an Interchange
Source: (1)
Revised
Page 586
12-INTERCHANGES SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 610 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
12.4 Interchange Types and Layouts
12.4.1 General
The basic interchange types includes the diamond, cloverleaf, partial cloverleaf, trumpet, direct,
semi-direct, and roundabout. These interchange types, and variations within each type, permit
adaptation to traffic needs, available right-of-way, terrain, and cultural features. The following
sections discuss these basic interchange types and design elements for laying out the interchange.
Each interchange must be designed to fit the individual site considerations. The final design may be
a minor or major modification of one of the basic types or may be a combination of two or more basic
types. Sections 12.3, 12.5, 12.6, and 12.7 provide the general design criteria for the individual
elements of the interchange.
12.4.2 Diamond Interchange
12.4.2.1 General
The conventional diamond is the simplest and most common interchange type. Diamonds include
one-way diagonal ramps in each quadrant and two intersections at the crossroad. With proper
treatments at the crossroad, the diamond interchange can accommodate a wide variety of
circumstances in urban areas where the crossroad operating speeds are 70 km/h or less. The
diamond is usually the best interchange choice where the intersecting road is not access controlled.
Figure 12-13 illustrates a typical diamond interchange. Some of its advantages and disadvantages
include:
Advantages
• All exits from the mainline occur before reaching the crossroad structure and entrances occur
after the structure. This conforms to driver expectancy and, therefore, minimises confusion.
• All traffic can enter and exit the mainline at relatively high speeds.
• At the crossroad, adequate sight distance can usually be provided and the operational
manoeuvres are consistent with other intersections on the crossroad.
• They require less right-of-way than other interchange types.
• The diamond configuration easily allows modifications to provide greater ramp capacity, if
needed in the future.
Page 598
12-INTERCHANGES SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 615 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
Additionally, the double roundabout diamond eliminates problems arising from the interaction of left
turns. However, it has the disadvantage that queues may develop on the off-ramp as other traffic
always has priority.
12.4.2.5 Split Diamond
A variation of the conventional diamond is a split diamond interchange. Split diamonds are normally
used in urban areas where the designer desires to provide access to two crossing roadway facilities
(desirably one-way pairs within 150 m of each other) that are spaced less than 1.5 km apart.
Normally, separate interchanges cannot be located within this distance without creating substandard
geometric conditions and/or weaving problems without the use of collector-distributor roadways. It
is desirable to make the connecting roadways (between the two crossroads) one-way with control of
access. Split diamonds have a very desirable feature in that traffic leaving the freeway can return at
the same interchange point and continue in the same direction.
Figure 12-15 shows a split diamond in conjunction with a pair of one-way cross streets and one-way
frontage roads. The layout and operation of both the crossroad and the at-grade terminals are
simplified. Traffic leaving the freeway is afforded easy access to return to the freeway and continue
the journey in the same direction.
Figure 12-15: Split Diamond Interchanges
Page 603
12-INTERCHANGES SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 715 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
13.2.4 Traffic Calming
To manage vehicular speeds and to reduce exposure risk to all users, traffic calming methods may
be required. Traffic calming measures are usually physical because of their proven effectiveness in
reducing speeds, and collisions (e.g. raised crosswalks, see Section 13.2.3.4).
Traffic calming can be either proactive or reactive. The street cross sections and junction details
included in this Manual are meant to create streets that have been designed to keep speeds low and
crossings short. At locations where pedestrian safety is of concern (e.g. near schools), designers
should use traffic calming devices as part of the new street design process. After streets are built, if
designers find that traffic speeds or volumes are excessive, or that safety is compromised, traffic
calming devices should be retrofitted into the problem streets. In both scenarios, design and
implementation are an iterative process that requires monitoring and adjustment. For guidance on
traffic calming methods, see the DMT Abu Dhabi Urban Street Design Manual (4).
13.3 Cyclists
This section addresses cyclist (bicycle) facilities and provides guidance as to their intended use,
location, and width. For additional guidance on cycle facilities, see the Abu Dhabi Urban Planning
Council Urban Street Design Manual (4), Abu Dhabi Walking and Cycling Master Plan (23), and
AASHTO Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities (58).
13.3.1 Definitions
The following terms and definitions apply to Section 13.2.4; see :
1. Cycle Track. A facility reserved for cyclists and separated from motor vehicle traffic.
2. Cycle Lane. A lane within the travelled way reserved for cyclists.
Key principles for cycle lanes are as follows:
• A Cycle lane is a one way cycle facility marked on a road surface.
• Cyclists have exclusive use of the cycle lane.
• Located on local roads with low volume and speed of traffic.
• Corridor width should more than 11 metres with a minimum carriageway width of 6 metres.
• Separation buffer should be used where cycle lanes are located alongside on street parking.
• Where the carriageway is less than the corridor allowance then cyclists should make use of
the shared lane proposal shown below.
3. Shared Roadway. Any roadway upon which a separate cycle lane is not designated and
which may be legally used by cyclists regardless of whether such facility is specifically
designated as a cycle path (e.g., Avenue, Access Lane, frontage road).
Key principles for shared and mixed traffic facilities are as follows:
Page 703
13-PEDESTRIAN & CYCLIST FACILITIES SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------

--- PAGE 760 ---
ROAD GEOMETRIC DESIGN MANUAL
All gates must have adequate locking devices to ensure that they are only used by authorised
personnel. The responsible government agency must maintain a record of all personnel that possess
keys to the locked gates.
16.5.3 Pedestrian Fencing
Pedestrian fencing may be used for the following purposes:
• to prevent pedestrians from crossing road at high risk locations (e.g. mid-block crossing on
major streets with medians);
• to assist in directing pedestrians to safe road crossings (e.g. at roundabouts);
• to prevent pedestrians from walking into the path of vehicular traffic, particularly at locations
where pedestrian activity is high; and
• to exclude pedestrians from high-volume, high-speed roads (e.g. freeways, expressways).
There is wide range of fencing that may be used to constrain pedestrians. The designer should
consider the following:
• Fencing should be constructed principally from vertical members to make it difficult to climb.
• Avoid ridged horizontal members to limit the possibility of components spearing through a
vehicle in the event of a collision.
• Fencing located in the clear zone must not be hazardous to either vehicle occupants or
pedestrians when struck by a vehicle.
• The area between the roadway and pedestrian fence should be designed using appropriate
landscaping or surfacing to discourage its use by pedestrians.
• Pedestrian fencing used to constrain pedestrians should be design to not resist penetration
by a vehicle. If vehicle constraint is required, use an appropriate safety barrier; see the Abu
Dhabi Roadside Design Guide (28).
16.5.4 Protective Fencing on Roadway Overpasses
16.5.4.1 General
Protective fencing is generally provided:
• where there is a potential hazard to roadway users resulting from objects being dropped,
thrown, or dislodged from overhead crossings;
• where there is a need to protect pedestrians who cross on the overpass (e.g. near schools,
playgrounds, or other locations where children may be present);
• where a cycle path is carried across the structure;
• where problems with pedestrians cannot be easily kept under surveillance by police;
• where experience from nearby structures indicate a need;
Page 748
16-ROADSIDE AMENITY SECOND EDITION -NOVEMBER 2021
----------------
